Quarantine economy
Good afternoon, welcome to the next panel
discussion of Going Digital 2020 conference.
This panel is devoted to a topic
that is more and more interesting,
given that we saw various
restrictive measures in last months.
The first came in the spring,
the spring quarantine,
and then we had a loosening of the summer,
and winter quarantine came
and we are now somehow dealing with it.
We see that the economy will open again,
so this panel is devoted to the so-called
quarantine economy or economy during quarantine.
My name is Aneta Zachová,
I am the editor-in-chief of the euractiv.cz.
I'm glad to be able to moderate
this panel discussion.
I have great guests here,
Mikuláš Peksa sitting next to me,
MEP for the Czech Pirate Party.
Good day.
Online joined us Mrs. Danuše Nerudová,
Rector of Mendel University in Brno.
Mrs. Helena Horská,
Raiffeisenbank's chief economist,
Mrs. Šárka Homfray, a lawyer and trade unionist,
also accepted the invitation.
And Mr. Karel Gargulák, an analyst from EDUin.
We have an hour-long discussion ahead of us,
so I will probably end introduction,
because I am very curious about
what I will hear from our dear guests.
Let's look at the first topic,
for many people the quarantine economy
means the transition from working in offices
to home offices.
I wonder how this move to home-offices
or teleworking, as it is also called,
how did it affect the economy?
I would like us to talk not only purely
about the Czech one,
but also to look at the whole European economy.
I'll take advantage of the fact that
I have two great economists here,
so first I'd ask the Mrs Rector,
if she could answer the same question.
How did the transition from offices
to the home office actually affect the economy?
Please Mrs Rector
Good afternoon,
I would like to thank you for the invitation,
it is a great honor for you to invite me.
As for how homeoffice has affected the economy,
it has manifested itself in several ways.
It manifested itself primarily
in what we all clearly observe,
and that is that when
you look up at the sky, you don't see any lines.
So this is one of the consequences of home offices,
because I think that business trips
have dropped by almost 80 percent.
I think the MEP could explain
how full the planes used to be
because everyone flew to a working
meeting in Brussels.
And now he's either driving
or sitting in a half-empty plane.
So basically it has a big impact on traffic,
that's one thing.
It certainly has an impact on the online economy,
because when people moved to a home office
and spent most of it at home.
Of course, thanks to closed shops,
the online economy sector is developing.
And, unfortunately, it has consequences,
we can discuss that, unfortunately,
as how it was set up
with the unfortunate settings and selection,
it happened that some shops
were discriminated against
and did not have a fair conditions.
It will definitely have an impact
on the real estate market.
The companies will significantly reconsider
how they will use their office space
for the coming years.
Some want to reduce it, some will change
amount of employees with own office,
or on the contrary some want to have
a higher standard, want more space
so that employees are separated from each other.
Last but not least, I think covid means
that some myths have fallen
and that the resistance of employers
to send people at home office has fallen,
because one big myth was
that people at the home office are inefficient,
because they don't work, but I think this crisis has shown that in many cases
it is not true at all
and the efficiency is far greater,
If all really went into those digital platforms.
For me, it is one big change in transport,
in the real estate market
and, of course, it will also be indirectly
a change in the construction industry,
because office space will be built
according to new standards and new patterns.
Thank you very much for this introductory part
about how the transition to the digital environment
has affected our classic economy,
such as the real estate market.
I would now have a question for Mrs Horská
and I would remain at this economic level.
Mrs. Horská, can you tell us what positive effects
this transition had to the digital environment,
to the Czech and European economy,
and whether we can learn from it for the future?
How to work in the coming years?
Please, Mrs. Horská.
I also thank you very much for the invitation,
I hope that we will have a very interesting
and fruitful discussion.
As for the question, the positive impact
of homeoffice was certainly visible,
because without homeoffice, we would be less
able to get covid-19 under control.
However, it is necessary to realize that
homeoffice is not a model of work for everyone.
I think it's good to realize.
It is, as it is often said,
a possibility for white-collar workers,
while blue-collar workers, that means,
people working in normal industrial production,
unfortunately cannot benefit from homeofice yet, e
ven at this time
when we should move towards automation,
robotization and then digitization.
It is necessary to realize that
in Czechia, according to the CERGE study,
the home office regarded just a third of Czechs,
which means that it is not even half of the people,
and the home office was focused mainly
on large cities.
Especially Prague and large regional cities.
So the home office in general, not only
in the Czech Republic but also in Europe,
is also dependent on a certain degree of urbanization.
It can be used in cities, but it is less
well used in industrial fields.
Also there is difference in application of home offices
between economies that are more industrial,
such as the Czech Republic but also Germany,
in contrast to other countries,
such as the United Kingdom, the Netherlands,
which are countries more focused on services.
At the services, of course, we can imagine
that the home office is much more used.
And another aspect is very interesting,
homeoffice is rather offered
to people who have higher education,
because they work in those fields
that are managerial,
which are quite similar to services,
or when they already work in an industrial enterprise
so they work in those managerial positions ,
which may just be relocated somewhere
other than industrial production.
So when we talk about home office, I would like to
emphasize that we're talking about Czechia,
only about a third of the population
and it is necessary to consider
that two-thirds did not have this chance.
That means saleswomen, drivers,
people standing at the production lines
did not have this option and had to find
other ways to deal with the covid situation.
And I think that the good thing, as Danuše
has already mentioned, is the factor
that people have lost such shyness,
fears of home office and perhaps
even bigger worries about the home office
had employers, company managers.
I have to confirm what the Danuse said,
in our bank the issue of home office
was very much disscussed and I have to say
that both approaches appeared there,
as the positive progressive approach that said
yes let's use home office,
because by the way from the survey
we did among our employees, we know
that employee satisfaction increased
due to the fact that they were given a chance
to use the home office.
Again, not everyone in the bank got this chance.
Unfortunately, we also have professions
that could not use the home office,
for example people at the counters,
at the cash desks.
But employee satisfaction has increased,
which is certainly good,
but we also had managers who
opposed the change a bit, who were afraid
that in a way they would lose control of their employees.
We also need to think about managerial skills,
how to educate managers
and how to teach people to manage remotely,
how to work with a team remotely,
and I think that at this we have moved
really forward in a few months.
and things we would have been doing for years,
we managed in a few months due to the pressure.
We had to implement the change
Even I had to learn to manage my team remotely
and I actually take advantage of these benefits,
from the new knowledge I learned.
Acceleration of big changes that would otherwise take a long time,
it means that from  business as usual,
we got into that acceleration
to the speed of changes.
And I have to say that at work it was also
reflected in a change in the work environment,
as Danuše said, that the design of the offices,
common areas, will actually change.
It's not necessarily about needing more space,
but we will use the existing space for
fewer people,
because we assume that maybe every
third person will take turns with a colleague
and the third will be at homeoffice.
So there is really a change in the work
environment, in the organization of work
that we might experienced in the next five years,
and now we will experience it in a single year.
So the keyword is acceleration.
Thank you very much, Mrs. Horská, for this
really nice overview of the economic change.
You were talking about the employees about
the large variety of people,
who couldn't transition to the home office,
and stayed at cash registers or at production lines.
I will leverage of the fact
that Šárka Homfray is here with us
and I would like to ask her if she thinks
that governments, not only the Czech one
took care about these employees
during quarantine economy?
Please, Mrs. Homfray.
Hello, I hope you can hear me well
and thank you for the invitation as well.
Frankly, I don't think we were able to
take such good care of them as a state.
We all know that, there was not enough
protective equipment in the spring.
This was, of course, a worldwide problem.
Unfortunately, I must say that many employers
did not buy enough protective equipment
for their employees even in the fall
when it was more available.
Because truth is that
many employers have no legal obligation to
equip their employees with this equipment.
Furthermore, we felt quite a great
reluctance of a number of employers,
especially in the autumn,
to allow home office or work from home,
even there where it was possible in the spring.
There was a significantly lower will to
further measures such as dividing employees
into non-meeting groups, workplace
modifications, reduction of working hours
or a reduction in production, unless
the government measures forced them to do so.
There are, of course, employers who did this,
for example, banks cut working hours
at their branches even though
it was not restricted, it was their will,
but then there were a number
of employers who did not do anything.
It was really clear that during the second wave
the will was even lower for any restrictions
than it was  in during spring.
It must be said that this is not
remembered on this situations by our legislation,
by the Labor Law or in other regulations,
especially by those related to hygiene
related to safety during work.
The crisis law, especially the enforcement of
violations of these crisis measures,
is not completely set for the situation
that happened.
Inspection bodies do not have the capacity to monitor such things.
It was not clear for many of those measures if
violations would be enforceable at all.
So I have to say that maybe will or
at least there was an effort to
instruct the employers to provide
the employees, but the small enforceability
of the measures simply
caused that no one did it voluntarily.
Thank you very much.
I would go a little further.
In the quarantined economy, we are witnessing that some sectors
are facing huge losses, almost bankrupcy,
but there are sectors, who are winning now.
Mr. Peksa, can you give us any
insight into which sectors within Europe,
in the context of what is happening,
are strengthening and if is it good or bad?
We know it is mainly digital sector,
new platforms and applications are being made,
We have witnessed a digital boom,
do you think that this is a good thing?
Do you think it will last to future?
I would not say it good, because the process
or the transition that is going on now
is actually very stormy, very fast and
the change is very revolutionary
and many people suffer a lot because of it.
On the other hand, as has been said here,
it is  a great acceleration of this process,
because we have had various programs,
such as Digital Europe and so for many years before
which were supposed to digitize Europe.
Now we have basically got into the situation
that during the month we are in a position
that we must be digital, no matter what.
So we started to digitize hurriedly,
because we had simply no other option left.
I think it is true that some were
prepared for it,
at the same time it is true that some
were tragically unprepared for it
nd they then had a big problem adapting to it.
These processes change a lot,
it was seen during the first quarantine,
when restaurants came under pressure
that they could not open,
and they started to react relatively quickly
by cooking food and letting it be delivered.
So I think one of those sectors that has
experienced a huge boom is delivery services.
Although we will have to think about
how it works,
because what I found out, the conditions
that employees have there, are often quite critical,
but it is actually one of those industries
that was developing
and it was not so obvious before.
I think a lot depends on the company
or on the institution.
I remember, and it was mentioned here,
within the European Parliament
it was somehow the custom that everyone
just flew to Brussels,
they all met there physically and
it was impossible to do otherwise.
Then suddenly in the situation
when a package of legislation appeared
that had to be approved, or voted about it
and it could not be done in person,
we began to invent alternative solutions
how to vote online.
How to deal with these things.
It was really very spontaneous, I would
often say that in terms of cyber security,
it could be done better,
but in the end it happened.
Well, I think those who were right, said before
the crisis that it was necessary to digitize,
modernize because they
were better prepared for it.
For example journalists have asked me many times,
how the Pirate Party has dealt with this.
We didn't notice it,
because we've worked online before,
which means it wasn't really a change for us.
We just kept using the same tools.
I found out that somewhere else
they have magical problems
such as the resignation of the party chairman
nd they cannot convene an online congress
and they don´t know how replace him.
So they are in dead end,
and they're still using the resigned person,
because they just can't get a new one.
So it probably depends on what, how and where.
I think we have realized that we have great
shortcomings throughout the organization,
because until February 2020, healthcare
or preparation for these pandemic crises
was wholly considered the domain of the
Member States of the European Union,
So it means, when in March came the question
"so where does EU have maks,
because we don't have any and where are
the warehouses from which you will supply us?"
So there were none. So logically
arosed the question where to take.
I am glad that we managed to
convince the European Commission,
that it had started solving the problem,
so that sometime during the summer,
deliveries from central purchasings organized
by the European Commission began to flow,
although I think that even at this moment,
any European treatiet order this.
It just does it because such a situation
has occurred and it just had to be.
So I think we've just adapted in a number of areas,
and that adaptation will take place.
It might be better to think about it in advance,
but after the battle, everybody is general.
Thank you very much, we talked
about acceleration, about adaptation
and I think, that in this it will be
an important role to actually prepare it,
or, they should be prepared already, but
somehow to lead people to be able to adapt.
Education plays a key role in this,
I would as Karel Gargulák
from EDUin, who deals with education,
and I would like to know if the current
school system, or the education system,
is actually ready for these changes that have
occurred in the European and global economy,
if now Czech schools will be able to
produce graduates who will be prepared
or this relatively different reality
than was needed 5, 10 years ago.
Please, Mr. Gargulák.
Hello, thank you very much for the word,
I tried to indicate it in my first post,
covid and the closure of the economy
slapped the system in the sense
that when we were talking about the potential of
automation and digitization 10 years ago,
people have tried it now,
and tried what it means.
It showed potentials of individual segments and sectors
for change within the organization of work
I'm not an economist, I'll leave all this
to Mrs professor and Mrs doctor
to talk more about it.
But what I would like to say is that
the interventions and the economic transformation,
and the effects of closing down
individual businesses,
can bring smaller segments to that, they close,
people will be unemployed,
they will push them out of the labor market
and they will have to look for a new place
in it and that labour market will change.
There must be a safety net for the public sector
with educational services in order for people
to be retrained, or to be able to acquire other
professions and find employment in that labor market.
The public sector is not sufficiently
prepared for this role.
Not ready because those schools would not care,
but there is not an assignment that would say
how the institutions should do it.
And they primarily do not feel this need.
Because support for education is directed
a bit outside the education sector
and revolves around the employment office.
Or around the own initiative
of large companies that are already working
on further training of employees.
The primary role in this should be
played by those schools,
support and assignments should come.
Support in terms of finance and in terms
of defining what we want and what new roles
these institutions should play. What should high
schools and colleges do in the new reality.
And sharing the impact of the new, dynamic
economy that awaits us in the coming months.
We have been slapped, now we are still
in the mode of economic subsidies,
but in time they will end
and some sectors will fall to the bottom
and it will be necessary to continue
working with those employees.
Public support will be need to be provided
so that these employees can find employment somewhere.
That is the basic point,
I can bring to this debate.
Thank you so much for this point.
Again, I would like to invite the participants
of the discussion to write us comments
and questions so that we can answer them.
I have the first questions from the audience.
The question is about pouring liquidity
into the economy.
Economists have strongly appealed to
the government,
as whole economical sectors were being closed,
to immediately release liquidity,
to pump money into the economy,
and our viewers would like to know
how long we can work this way,
how long it can last us,
let's say this pouring money into the economy.
This is definitely a question for
our two economists in the panel,
I do not know if
Mrs Nerudova would like to start?
Thank you, I read that it was a question
aimed at me.
I think it's necessary to realize, and
I must say I have goosebumps, when someone
says the word "pump",
because there was no pumping in our country.
It is necessary to realize that
in comparison with other states
there has been no pumping,
I want to say, that all things are related.
At the beginning of the spring crisis,
when was the lockdown,
we said that liquidity needs to be brought
into the economy,.
We pointed out that the state has
relatively simple, effective and cheap tools
to get liquidity into the economy.
I must say that we were basically
not heard at all, because we proposed that
for example, to abolish the payment of VAT,
which is a very effective tool.
It was a really big slap in the spring,
so we wre talking about the waivering of
social and health insurence payments for employers.
I must say that the spring crisis has shown
that there is essentially zero state
confidence in businesses in the economy,
because unlike Western countries,
which trusted entrepreneurs and
really tried to help them effectively
we have created incredibly complex
administrative tools that a lot of entrepreneurs
didn't get the help at all, or they got it
late, or they said to themselves
"it's not worth it, I'll help myself".
So, from my point of view in the spring,
the help came very late and the fact
that it came late was due to the fact
that there was simply no trust
n the business sector and we still did not
believe that entrepreneurs needed help
and the state felt more like
the help would be misused.
So the excessive administrative burden
basically caused that the aid was ineffective.
Then, when the economy defrosted and restarted,
the right manager should have
evaluated these tools,
their effectiveness and impacts.
I have to say,
that unfortunately this did not happen.
The second wave came and we pulled the tools
out of the hat again, thinking they worked.
Yes, and at least they were
set up in time at the moment,
but because they already existed
so they just were recovered,
but we do not know if they were effective,
so maybe we can do something what is not effective,
from my point of view is certainly not effective
to help with 500CZK a day to self-employed person,
who for example rents a hairdressing salon
and monthly rents cost 20 000 CZK,
so this help is really not effective
because it does not even cover fixed costs.
And here it is necessary to say, just for
comparison, how the aid looks like west of us,
so small and medium-sized enterprises
in Germany at this moment have
aid that will receive 70 percent of the
turnover from November 2019.
If restaurants in Germany are closed
till January 10, they will receive
70 percent of their turnover in December 2019
as an aid in December 2020.
So you feel from these numbers that the
word pumped can definitely not be used,
because the Germans are pumping,
in our country, there is definitely
no pumping of help for entrepreneurs
And the question of how long,
the state should do everything to prevent
the economy from closing for the third time,
but I'm afraid that just as
the train missed us in the summer,
the train again missed us at the moment
because the countries around us who
knew they have to build trace capacity,
that they had to build call centers
and testing capacity,
so today they know that whoeve
r inoculates the first, largest population
will be able to start economy
and will have no more losses .
This is not happening here
and we are preparing for third wave.
And I call it the third, stupid lockdown,
because that lockdown might not be at all.
If we were to building vaccination centers
at this moment, as they do in Germany,
so that the economic damages
would be as small as possible.
So how long can it take?
Well, we will probably survive the third wave,
but we will have a huge deficit, we will
have huge costs of servicing the state debt,
we will have a large debt,
if we get to 60 percent of GDP of total debt,
then it must be said, that this debt will
definitely not be reduced by cutting expenditures.
Truth needs to be told to the citizens.
if there will be a third wave
and we will have such a large debt,
so cutting expenditures will not change that.
And there will come a time when we will have
to raise taxes and all of us will pay it.
And among us, abolition of the super-gross
wage and that debt over 130 billion CZK
all of us will pay it as well
Just to be clear, it says it helps,
it doesn't help.
Two-thirds of what is proposed
will go to high incomers
but we all will pay the debt,
in the form of higher taxes.
So much for me,
I hope I somehow left room for Helena,
That I did not say all of it.
Thank you very much, Mrs. Horská,
do you want to add something directly to this,
or do you think all important things
about pumping money into the economy,
which did not happen, were said here?
I think Dana was exhausting and emotional
at the same time, because she's right.
When we compare and promises versus actions,
I'm not surprised that those emotions
are so bubbling, because just the numbers,
I really like numbers,
so I'll start with the numbers again,
and I'll probably stay with them,
because Dana said everything needed,
and the figures are such that aid was paid
to this economy at the end of November,
not counting the purchase of Chinese respirators
and the rescue of indebted hospitals
unrelated to the covid and many other
expenses unrelated to the covid,
so the aid was also calculated
by the Ministry of Finance at 166 billion CZK,
that is 55% of the promised aid
in the amount of 289 billion CZK
and those loans which were promised
in the amount of almost 800 billions CZK
are drawn in units of percent.
because the companies, when they needed
help at the most critical time,
as Danuše mentioned, in the spring, did not
really get the help and they helped themselves.
At the moment when the various covid programs
such Covic Plus, Covid EGAP, Covid Export...
were already up and running, which was
very late, actually at the end of the first wave,
so the companies said
"Ok somehow we managed it,
somehow we helped ourselves and it goes on"
Perhaps what I would add to Danuše is that
the actually paid out aid was significantly lower,
I would agree that it was ineffective
and also it freezes, as Mr Gargulák
was talking about,
it freezes the strucure of economy,
that outdated structure of the economy,
it means that it creates in our employees
and employers, ie companies, the feeling,
that nothing will actually changed
and nothing has changed
and that we will then wake up to the original
reality and we start working in those
original works with original knowledge
and skills.
And we will suffice until the end of our working life
Unfortunately, the reality is really different,
because as it was said here before
and we should repeat it so that it gets stuck
in people's memory, there is acceleration here.
There is an acceleration of changes
and it requires a great challenge
for employees, employers and the government.
And it is a question of digitization:
being able to adapt for employees,
now we can see a change in working regime,
for companies a change in
work organization, new business models,
a new functioning of the economy
and we have a state here that
instead of reducing risk and uncertainty,
It is first week of December and
we do not know yet, what taxes,
we will pay from the first month
of the following year.
We don't know what the conditions of the covid
would look like if another wave came
We don't even know
what next week will look like.
So these are the challenges we face.
Without flexibility, ability to improvise,
our ability to improvise is amazing,
but I have a feeling that the government
is abusing it too much
and relying too much on it,
so unfortunately it doesn't look very good,
but we've done worse, we can do this,
but we can miss the train and I don't think
we should, it would be a great pity.
Thank you, I don't know if you saw,
but Mr. Peksa was smiling next to me
when you were speaking, so I she would like
to ask, if he wants to add something.
I certainly agree, because, as has been said,
the aid was very ineffective,
Fortunately, during this crisis, the European
response was more sensible than in the past.
Because most governments have understood
what to do, which means that given
the interconnectedness of the economy within
the common market, we have been partly saved
because the others around us have behaved sensibly.
For example, the Germans.
Because if they did it as badly
as our government did,
we were in worse trouble than we are now.
Perhaps I would add a side note,
I think that the answer at the level of the
European Economic Area, was spontaneous,
but was sensible,
but it was not coordinated in any way.
As the Member States have been arguing
about what they will do,
will do some rescue package,
and if they approve it at all,
so the whole process is not going effectively.
We do not yet know whether we will have a budget
or whether Hungary will block
it for some internal Hungarian reasons.
This is quite sad in my view, and we
should look for a way to make the management
of the whole European economy work more
rationally, because as it is set up now,
it is cumbersome and inefficient.
Thank you very much,
I have another question from the audience.
,I would like to ask Mrs Homfray about
employment.
The question is, in the sense of whether
the financial evaluation of the functions
using home office or flexible hours,
that came with quarantine economy, will decrease.
Mrs Homfray, can you comment on this,
do you think that there is room for a change
in financial valuation in these sectors?
To be honest, I hope not.
I would not like someone's salary to be reduced
because they can work in the evening.
Nor do I think that this should necessarily
be a reason for a reward preference.
Frankly, what I hope is that whether
flexible working hours or a home office
will finally stop being taken as a benefit,
because that is not a benefit.
It is an alternative work arrangement that
has its advantages and disadvantages
for both parties and at the same time
for each and every employee it does not have
the same advantages and disadvantages.
So definitely take it as a benefit,
especially the home office,
it was really taken that way until the spring,
for a number of employers or the vast majority.
Take it as a benefit, which like the icing
on the cake, I will allow someone to do it
he will reward me for it simply with
uncontrolled and immense flexibility,
so that by chance someone does not think
he does not work at home,
so I firmly believe that after this
year's experience
with this perception could and should be over.
Whether this will have any impact on
remuneration or on the growth
or decline of specific wages for a certain
type of job, just time will tell.
But there will be many more factors
that will now play a role in the growth
or decline of wage levels in
individual professions.
We simply have segments of the labor market here,
where it already seems, such as the hotel
and tourism industry,
that it may or already disappeared
up to 50% of jobs.
and these people will get somewhere
onto some empty labor market,
They will be theoretically qualified
in some other fields.
So certainly the wage level will not be
influenced only by that flexible arrangement.
I see that the interviewer asked if
the benefit would working from the office.
It's also not a benefit, but honestly it is,
because the experience is not unequivocally
positive, as we are not prepared for it,
we were not prepared,
nor for the employers,
as it follows from those surveys,
and honestly for me it is no surprise,
because various researches,
for example from Germany, where they have
more experience with home office and
and other flexible forms,
have shown that people miss those offices.
They miss their colleagues,
they miss informal faster work matters,
you really don't transfer everything to ZOOM
and other similar platforms.
And isolation plays a role,
domestic factors play a role,
so I think the experience will be such that
and again I say the experience is new to us
but abroad they have already figured out
that the home office is nice,
it has its places. It's a good tool for
dealing with certain situations,
but it's not 100% all the time,
for all the work.
in short, it is no win for any of those involved,
and that it will be approached in a helpful
but critical way.
Thank you so much for answering the questions
from the audience.
When we are talking about the home office
and the transformation of the economy,
we can actually observe the same in education.
We had a panel directly devoted to education,
but given that education and the economy
are very closely linked,
I would like to know,
this would be a question for Karel Gargulák,
how do you think the pandemic and
the onset of those homeoffices
can turn education in the Czech Republic?
Do you think that this leads to its
greater digitization,
and that even the actual digitalization of
education will lead to the fact,
that those school graduates
will be more digitally educated?
Please Mr. Gargulak.
It was certainly stated in the last panel
that the average age of a teacher is 50,
and for some of them the need to teach online was a big problem.
On the other hand, it has improved
competencies, such as control of those tools.
It occurs to me that the opposite has happened,
as everyone has realized the effects
of digitization, that it is not fiction,
and that it is a reality,
so everyone has realized
how important the school as an institution is.
We realized how crucial it is that
children meet each other at school,
the whole micro-society meets in one class.
They learn to work together, to cooperate,
to share roles, to organize as a unit.
These are important competencies,
which are then useful in dealing
with situations such as crises.
It's a trend against individualization,
when everyone will be at home,
alone and learning and it will be great.
So I think it balances the system.
In general, when we look at those things
that relate to some digital competences,
the using of digital educational resources,
platforms, is a tool
rather than the goal of that education.
The aim of education is to develop
basic knowledge and skills.
And those tools can be used for that.
It helped those teachers
in the long-term project,
the Digital Education Strategy until 2020,
and it was not fullfilling at all until now.
And suddenly it was such a huge leap,
in the context of building
those competencies of teachers,
to use, to master those tools, to be prepared,
that it flexibly pushed the whole area.
Now we have two such key changes in the level
of primary and secondary education,
which relate to the transformation
of computer science teaching,
which is already well prepared and structured,
but the terrain is not sufficiently prepared.
And then it is using of those digital tools
to make it a means of acquiring skills
and knowledge in those other fields,
such as the natural sciences, humanities etc.
This is suddenly more desirable and
everyone understands it more,
nobody understood it before, but now everyone
has at least a general idea of what it means.
This will help those changes associated
with the Strategy 2030.
I ended with that strategy
in my introductory speech.
I'm trying to find some more data here,
how it will look like with those executions.
I have such a remark,
it was said across those panels,
the competence of the public administration
to use its own administrative data,
for being able to plan measures or use some tools,
is very limited.
This is what the pandemic crisis has shown us,
it also applies to education, it applies
to all other sectors and segments,
and it is crucial to keep repeating it.
It is not about swearing at the public
administration, that officials are incompetent,
it is a political task that is missing.
Nobody pushes it,
because nobody understands it.
The senior management in that public
administration doesn't quite understand that either.
That pressure is important, from above
, the political assignment,
and from below, through actors such as
the public sector, non-profit organizations.
it has been very successful in education,
Or platforms that try to use
that data and interconnect it.
The public administration does not easily
find the internal competencies
and when it wants to find them, it often
outsources them, and it is not even advantageous,
because the public contracts and competitions
fall into the captivity of suppliers.
And it is important to comprehensively grasp
it all  and somehow connect, symbiosize it
and create competencies
in that public administration,
so that it can be then set up effectively.
So we wouldn't have 150 unused billions,
or how many the doctor said,
that were originally planned
to pour into the economy.
In my opinion, they did not get there, because
the imagination of the Ministry of Finance
is very limited and the Ministry of Industry
and Trade is not able to process it,
but that is the my opinion of a clerk.
Thank you very much,
I see that Mrs. Horská is asking for a word.
So please, Mrs. Horská.
Thank you very much, I would be able to
follow up on the various topics
that have been said here.
So I would briefly at least to some.
We were talking about sectors that were negatively
affected by the covid and some positively.
We all know the positive ones such as,
e-commerce, online businesses, online platforms,
but perhaps little is known that
the digital economy
in the Czech economy already
makes almost 8% of GDP.
This is a huge huge potential,
a huge counterweight to that other sector
that has so far been quite negatively
affected by the covid,
and that is the automotive industry.
We keep talking about the Czech economy being
dependent on the automotive industry,
and rarely talking about it in the Czech
economy,
digital economy already makes 8 percent of GDP
and has a tremendous potential to rise,
because during covid, and here again
I begin to use data from the McKinsey study
which was recently published, about Digital Challenges
and it shows that during the covid
in Central and Eastern Europe
there the rate of digitization of those
economies has risen by 50%
that amount of users increased significantly,
there has been an acceleration
in the number of clients using online,
for example 7 out of 10 Czechs
are using online shops.
It is people who did not even think
before about ordering food online
digitally and they are
using these services now.
And most of them are going to
use this new skill further,
that means, we are actually educating people.
It shows that the Digital as such has
huge potential for growth,
but we throw sticks under our feet.
And this is exactly the non-digitized
state administration,
the inability of the state
administration to work with data,
meaning, to be able to collect data, to
structure data, to use them,
to make decisions on the basis of data,
but in every section in which
the state administration works
we always come across a problem.
From the collection of data to their analysis,
to their aggregation,
to their processing and
to their decision-making based on data,
because it became clear during the covid,
that our government was not able to
to make decisions at all,
or was not willing to make decisions
So we have great potential.
And just for the digitization,
I see that Danuše is asking for word,
so I will let her speak,
During the covid some sectors rapidly
moved towards digitalization,
It will probably not surprise you
but it was, of course, retail,
but it is also banking and if I recall correctly,
it was also telecommunications services.
On the contrary, who was the least digitized,
and I was quite surprised,
were the travel agencies, which is very
surprising given what they experienced,
but also the government
and insurance companies.
So we see that, each of the sectors reacts
differently to these covid shocks.
Taken together, there is great potential
to actually use the covid shock
to accelerate digitization,
but we must have prepared
infrastructure, institutions
including the government,
high-quality Internet connection,
and especially the prepared population,
employees, the workforce.
They must be prepared for the challenges
that await us, because we will
probably not do the same work
for the rest of our lives
and we will have to adapt to new challenges
and we will have to change occupations,
we will have to change our work skills.
So that is my comments,
thank you for the word.
Thank you very much, I saw that
Mrs Nerudová and Mr Peksa asked for the word
So I will ask Mrs Nerudova first.
I would like to complete Helena
in the sense, that the accelerator
that we have now and leads to the fact
that, and in business, there is not much talk
about digitization,
but about digital transformation,
which is even a higher level.
It is necessary to realize that while
business is doing digital transformation,
it creates digital structures,
it creates its digital twins.
So we have a public administration that has not
even started the process of digitization
So the scissors during covid will open even more
than they were before the covid.
Business and economics will completely
move away from that state administration.
At this moment, the state administration
and its inability to digitize
create institutional limits
for this business,
but the state administration
also creates them for itself.
If the digital sector is 8%, at the moment
many companies have a digital structure, etc.
and we have a tax system that is 30 years old
and at the time it was created
digital sector. didnt even existed
So it is quite clear that the state will not
be able to tax the digital economy at all.
Therefore, many of those activities
take place in the Czech Republic
without the companies being
physically present here,
and the whole concept of our taxation
is based on that physical presence.
We just can't tax
the digital presence in the country.
We are talking
about an absolutely fundamental change,
a change of paradigm in the economy,
in all areas,
And our problem is, that we have not been able
to do basic structural reforms for 30 years,
and the accelerator accelerates the good,
but on the other hand it reveals that bad.
It revealed this here,
and if we are not able to respond to it,
we will miss the train, but the most
importantly we will not be able
to fix the hole in those public finances.
I have been pointing this out for a long time,
it is a huge problem.
and  because Mr Peksa is listening to us,
so because we have the perfect tool here
the National Recovery Plan,
which should contain all these things,
transformation costs for the basic structural reforms,
and instead we are writing there
that it will stick budget holes and tax shortfalls,
this is completely unacceptable to me
and I am sincerely very happy
that there are people sitting in Brussels
who have written clear guidance on
on what in the National Recovery Plan is.
And we think that somehow here,
forgive me the word, fool it.
and that no one will know it,
but this time it will be known,
because the countrie really give there
fundamental structural reforms and their costs
So I would appeal here,
if this discussion could open up
in public space in the Czech Republic,
it would be very nice.
Because so far the plan means opening the
drawers and pulling out everything
that did not get
into the normal state budget,
and the second thing is that there is no
public discussion about it at all.
That National Recovery Plan
is being created under a veil of secrecy.
Have you read somewhere or did Minister Havlíček
talk transparently about the proces
of how it will be created,
where there will be some reviews
so that those stakeholders can enter into it,
or asked academics for some cooperation?
Nothing like this is happening
and I think that this is an absolutely key
opportunity for the Czech Republic.
Thank you very much,
many things have been said here
that could be further discussed by Mr Peksa.
There was mentioned the National Recovery Plan,
which means a kind of European aid
to the national economies.
We were talking about a taxation on
the digital economy,
which is also a big issue
for the whole of the European Union,
so please Mr Peksa,
you may start.
I will probably
make a brief comment on the data,
what was said here about the data
in the state administration,
so I would fully sign it
and add one more thing.
The state administration
must be able to work with them,
and when it produces, collects
and evaluates the data, so except
evaluating for its own purposes, it should
publish it for the purposes of other actors,
because in the end
the private individual could benefit
from having access to the date
that the state collects.
It actually collects them for public money,
so it is a public good
and there is no reason not to share it,
but it does not share it.
It was a problem at all to get information
about the number of infected people,
information about what quarantine
measures will be announced.
Nothing was here, honestly
I can't imagine how I would run a pub
without someone telling me if I should shop for
next week because it will be open or closed.
It was not clear
and for those people it is a disaster
which is completely useless and pointless,
so I think that the data, shouldnt be
just collected and evaluated,
but should be mainly be published.
That data, which the state owns
Secondly, the question of digital taxation,
es, this is something we have been dealing
with for a long time,
at least on the verbal level.
It would be good to emphasize the direction
in which the European Union is working.
Here on the table were proposals that actually
addressed the question of the taxation.
simply said, we have a business in one state
that  runs a digital business in another state
without being legally or physically present there.
It makes money from it, this is something
that creates a big imbalance
in international relations,
because some countries concentrate
those profits at the expense of others.
It is necessary to address it, unfortunately,
we constantly encounter
at the level of the European Union
on the problem that,
the tax issues are decided by unanimity.
This means that if one state, which
coincidentally profits from this mechanism
decides to block it, then it simply will not happen.
We should probably wonder
if the mechanism that one can block all,
is good and if it helps to solve it.
Because obviously the solution
to digital taxation is not happening
and as a result, some budgets of some states,
typically the Czech Republic,
are getting under more and more pressure.
And the last thing,
the National Recovery Plan,
I would have signed it,
I basically had to laugh
because I registered how the process was going.
Incredible things were happening there,
the ministry was leaking information
like they don't really know,
what projects they should do,
so they will just repair all the bridges
in the Czech Republic no matter what,
It doesnt matter, that it is not needed,
because what else would they spend it on?
Another big problem was that very little was
consulted with counties and municipalities.
And in fact, the information about what
would be needed at regional and local level,
did not get up to government at all.
And then, of course, the process of
that internal comment within the government
was completely unimaginable.
On Friday, they brought a plan from
the inter-ministerial comment procedure,
which should be handed
to the government on Monday,
it did not arrive at all,
and the minister sent it to Brussels,
saying that it doe not even have to
be approved by the government.
The ministers even were not able to vote about it,
because they simply could not agree on it before.
And in this sad way,
the government's plan was being prepared,
so I think we actually need
a far more participatory way
of how are these economic strategies formed.
It's just the way, how is it created now,
that someone just writes it from the table
and it's supposed to be
applied in the whole country,
so I'm afraid this just can't work.
I think that in those other countries
they understood it
and I think that there will be a
lot of pressure on the Czech Republic
to, in some sense, innovate its processes
of its own internal decision-making,
because like, let's face it,
no one will send money from the outside
to watch it be thrown out the window,
it's just not politically bearable,
we can't defend it if we say 1000 times
that we are defending the state interest
or the national interest,
it just doesn't work.
Thank you very much, I'm very sorry,
but I have to end this discussion,
because it's already 5pm, we could
certainly discuss about it for hours and hours
specifically about the National Recovery Plan,
which is also a very interesting topic
for me, which I try to cover
and I see how difficult it is, because
it is not entirely easy to get information.
I would like to thank you
many times for a great discussion.
I hope that some of the appeals
that we heard here,
that we will be able to get somewhere further.
We'll see, so thank you so much.
We have another program, now I would
ask Šárka Homfrey to stay here with us,
because now she will have an interview
with her colleague Klára Votavová.
So definitely don't leave the computers yet and hold on with us.
We can be looking forward
to the interview with Šárka Homfrey
and then we have one more panel
about the future of digital democracy.
Thank you very much
and I wish you a pleasant rest of the evening